>>LISA GARR: Have you ever felt
disconnected or disassociated
from your body?
You know that stagnant energy
that is trapped in your body
could actually be the reason.
And it's affecting
all of the systems
in your body required for
health and for wholeness.
Would you like to learn
how to connect your body's
innate circuits again?
Hi, I'm Lisa Garr and
joining me is the master
of bioenergetic medicine--
Dr. Sue Morter she is known
for bringing science, spirit,
and human possibility
together-- welcome.
>>SUE MORTER: It is such a
joy to be with you always,
Lisa, and a great
joy to be here.
>>LISA: Yes, I'm really
looking forward to this
because you are not
only the embodiment
of bioenergetic medicine.
But I would love to hear
you explain what is it.
>>MORTER: Bioenergetic
medicine is something
a little more close to home
than people probably think.
It is an energy that
flows through our body.
"Bio" means body and
"energetic" means energy--
and there is an
energy that is flowing
through the physical
body constantly.
And if that energy
is flowing freely,
then we are healthy
and vital and
clear and strong and robust.
And we can manifest and achieve
the things that we want.
And if it's not, it's
kind of like we can't.
So what we're doing
is learning how
to move that energy consciously
and intentionally so
that it doesn't stagnate.
So that it doesn't
cause our lives
to become less abundant and
flourishing than it could be.
>>LISA: That is the source
of all disease is basically
stress and stuck energy.
>>MORTER: Absolutely,
when energy is not moving,
vital force isn't moving.
So a communication that's
designed to be happening
in the body is not available.
It's not available to tell
the electromagnetic system,
the respiratory system,
the hormonal system,
the endocrine system, the
immune systems what's going on.
So if the energy isn't
moving and the communication
it isn't happening, pretty
soon our bodies just
become segmented and
breakdown starts to happen.
Cells start to implode.
And disease gets started.
>>LISA: But Western
medicine segments it.
It's here's the endocrinologist
and here's the heart specialist
and there's various--
it's like they take different
departments for an organ.
It doesn't look
at the whole body.
>>MORTER: Yes, and this
is part of the problem.
This is why our
country is in the shape
that it's in regarding so many
disease conditions just taking
over and so many
medications that
are being prescribed for all
kinds of separate conditions.
Because we're no longer
looking at the whole being
in our medical culture.
And it is time that we start
bridging these worlds back
together again and allowing the
whole being to have a chance.
>>LISA: The great news is
that we can do this ourselves.
And it's actually only ourselves
that can do this, right?
>>MORTER: Yes, we're the
only ones that can actually
allow healing to happen.
The beauty is it's
by design supposed
to be happening automatically.
And what we have
not been taught is
how to allow that to happen
without getting in the way.
Many of our habitual ways of
thinking and being and doing
an actioning in
the world are what
gets in the way of that
natural energy flow
to allow us to self heal.
>>LISA: Even if you do
so many things right,
you've got environmental toxins
and environmental stressors
and things that we never could
have predicted in our world.
>>MORTER: Yes, absolutely.
>>LISA: So you pull this
energy together from--
is it multiple layers?
Is it from the ground?
How do you do this?
>>MORTER: Yes, we're using
the energies of the Earth
to help us feel
grounded and nurtured.
And we're also
using the energies
of inspiration and possibility
to allow us to be uplifted
and to engage in a bigger,
better life for ourselves
than, perhaps, we've been
experiencing trapped inside
of our old beliefs.
And, most importantly,
we're learning
how to take all those
energies from outside of us
and move them through
the inside of us
to allow an
integration to occur.
So that we're tapping all of
the aspects of our wholeness
again and allowing ourselves
to live as magnificent creators
rather than just
striving survivors.
>>LISA: From the neck up.
Now, you have come from a
long line of doctors, yes?
Your father--
>>MORTER: I am
number 9 in a family
of 13 doctors in my family.
>>LISA: Wow, you're committed.
>>MORTER: Yes, it's
we're either very devoted
or we're just not very creative
to think of other things to do.
[LAUGHTER]
>>LISA: Well, you're carrying
out a massive body of work
here.
>>MORTER: We're completely
devoted to this.
And it has been my
whole life purpose.
I know that it's why I'm on
the planet to share the work
that I'm sharing.
>>LISA: Nice, tell me about your
father and the Morter Clinic
and the Morter Institute.
>>MORTER: So the
Morter Institute
is something that I have
founded in the last 20 years.
I've been working with the
work that my father developed
and taking it further into the
realms of meditation and kind
of a spiritual application
of this grounded body of work
that was originally designed,
called bioenergetics,
to help people heal naturally.
So my father was a pioneer in
energy medicine, a term that
is now becoming very popular.
And people are very interested
because it depicts our ability
to use energy to heal
ourselves and utilizing energy
to heal ourselves is what
natural self-healing is all
about.
So my father started
developing these techniques
in the '70s when it wasn't
even a popular conversation.
In fact, it kind
of got ridiculed.
But he stayed the course
and developed techniques
that doctors, at the time, were
the only ones able to learn
the techniques were
utilizing the world just
in a hands on kind of way
applying different energy
modalities to different
parts of the body
to create circuitry for
healing in the system again.
>>LISA: Is this also known
as applied kinesiology?
>>MORTER: Applied
kinesiology is similar.
This is the work of
bioenergetic synchronization.
And what it does is
utilizes applied kinesiology
but also brings into the mix
how our mind and emotions
contribute to the flow of energy
in our bodies and in our lives.
So we have the capacity to
interrupt the natural flow
of energy that's supposed to
be traversing through the body
by our limiting beliefs,
our convinced disposition
that we're not enough or
that's something's wrong
or that someone else should
be behaving differently for us
to be--
et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
And so what my
father started doing
was recognizing that
certain beliefs are hidden
at the subconscious level.
And we could use the body
and the patterns of energy
that the body is
demonstrating to reveal
to us what is stuck in this
individual's world that isn't
allowing them to proceed
with self-healing
or manifesting or
progressing in their lives
in some manner or another.
>>LISA: The mind is so powerful.
>>MORTER: It's so powerful
>>LISA: It sends all
these messages and signals
and then buries it.
>>MORTER: Yes, it's
trying to awaken.
But when it's being utilized
the way that we've been trained
to utilize it, it struggles.
And it moves into a
sense of survivorship.
And it wrestles trying
to make things work,
but it alone is not operating
from a place of wholeness.
And so we're constantly
stuck in a reality
of surviving and making do and
trying to find what's wrong
and fixing it, et cetera.
So my work is about moving to an
entirely different perspective
altogether.
So that we're no longer
looking for what's wrong,
finding it, and fixing it.
But we're using our
mind and training
it to become the creator that
it is truly intended to be.
It's supposed to be integrated
in the body with the breath
and allowing mind, body,
spirit, if you will,
to collectively work
in a unified fashion.
Because when we unify,
we're in an empowered state.
When we're splattered
and dispersed, we're not.
>>LISA: And separated
and fragmented--
so the mind sends these
messages to the body.
They get housed in the body.
And then you help decode
them and connect the mind
and the body all together.
>>MORTER: Yes, because when
the mind connects with the body
again, it starts listening
instead of directing.
When the mind is not
connected to the body,
it's trying to drive the show.
It's trying it's like--
I don't know,
nobody's helping me.
So I got to get this job done.
Nobody is going to show
up to make this happen.
As it's isolating
as a separate self,
it begins to be
really fear based.
So when we connect
it to the body,
it starts to feel different
vibrational frequencies.
And there is a wisdom
rising up through the body
that when the mind
comes onto the body,
it now can sense
and feel an entirely
different energetic frequency.
And so it interprets
reality differently
because it's more grounded.
So our body is like our Earth.
And when we Earth-- when
we walk in the grass,
we feel so much better.
When we lay down
on the grass, how
we feel just so relieved
if we feel overwhelmed.
The same kind of thing is true.
That the high frequencies of
the mind and its story writing,
they start to become
tethered and anchored
to the body when we bring
the mind onto the body
and start to breathe.
And when we do that, we
start to interpret what's
going on a little differently.
And the difference is we become
more available to possibility.
We become more available
to creativity into wisdom.
Wisdom is here.
It resides deep in our core.
It's not out there,
it's in here.
>>LISA: But when
you connect with it,
and there's injury or
there's a sense of illness
or there's something
that hurts--
what does the body do then?
It interprets it and then
it sends fear back up.
>>MORTER: Sure, if we bring
the mind onto the body
and there's some part of the
body that's not comfortable
or it's exhibiting
pain, et cetera,
there's a reason for that pain.
And the reason is that
energy is blocked.
Pain is an excess of
energy in the body.
And weakness is a
deficiency of that energy.
And so what we have to do is
get the energy flowing again.
So that the areas of blockage
where the energy is building up
get relieved.
And the areas of
deficiency where now cells
aren't getting the signals
they're supposed to get,
and they're not doing
their job because of that,
they start to receive
some of that energy that
was being hoarded over
here within that blockage.
So it starts to
create a harmonizing
balance in the system.
And all those systems start
plugging in and working
together again for wholeness.
>>LISA: You can do
this with your mind?
>>MORTER: You can do
it with your mind--
not just your mind but your mind
and your body and your breath.
That's our problem.
We try to manage it
all with our mind.
And the mind alone
can't get the job done.
That's why we keep struggling.
>>LISA: Right, which is
why we find ourselves
in poverty situations
where we can't manifest
and we get stuck by the
familial patterns of the mind.
So it really starts
at a deeper level.
It's not just out there
trying to find a job,
you actually have to go deep
into the cells of the body
to find out why you cannot
manifest what it is that you
want, right?
>>MORTER: Exactly.
Our true path is
accessible, but we
have to connect the mind
onto the core of the body
if we're ever going
to be able to perceive
what our true authentic
right next step is.
Whether that next step is
a thought or the next step
is taking an action in a certain
direction that is truly going
to serve our life destiny.
Otherwise, we're shooting off
in all kinds of directions--
trying this or trying
that and going for this
and trying really hard
but trying really hard
from the wrong come from.
And so we don't have
the out picturing
that we're looking for.
>>LISA: Now, in your life
you source this energy
from the Earth,
from spirit-- where
do you source this energy?
>>MORTER: I have
to stay connected
to the Earth of me, which is
the body, which is automatically
connected to the
Earth that we're all
walking around on top of.
And in the midst of that, there
is a deep spiritual truth that
rises up through the system.
Energy pours down through
the body automatically--
a high frequency energy, which
we would call spiritual energy.
It traverses all the way
down through the body
and hits the Earth.
And then turns and rises back
up in a different frequency.
The Earth steps it down for
what I call human consumption.
And as it rises up through
us, if we don't have blockages
in the way, it rises all the way
up to our conscious awareness.
And we are in touch with our
spiritual truth, our destiny,
what's meant to be, our
potentiality, et cetera.
If there are blockages along
the way, it picks up a wobble.
It becomes distorted.
And it creates a
distortion in the energy
field around the physical body.
Because the energy comes
down through, rises back up.
It comes up at the
top of the head
and creates this reverberation
and recycling of energy
constantly.
We look out through
that energy field.
And if it has a wobble,
it has a distortion,
we see a distorted reality.
And we can affirm it.
We can build a case for it,
but it still is distorted.
And in that distortion,
we make decisions
that aren't so good for us.
>>LISA: And what about
attracting other distorted
energies?
>>MORTER: That's
the only thing we
can do because in that
world like attracts like.
And so in that world, we
attract distorted circumstances.
We create this
entire reality based
upon what we think we
see, but it isn't true.
It doesn't have to be true.
>>LISA: So when people
come to you in your clinic,
when you see they
have an illness
or something-- what
are you physically
seeing or energetically seeing?
>>MORTER: Well,
I can see energy,
which is it's an amazing
time in our world
that we can even say
something like that.
[LAUGHTER]
20 years ago, I never
would speak about that.
And so hallelujah for energy
medicine and the progression
that humanity is making.
So when I look at
a human system,
I'm seeing the energy fields.
I'm seeing different
frequencies that are emitting
from the body, et cetera.
But even if someone
couldn't see energy,
when they become trained
in what we're speaking of,
you can see in the out
picturing of the physiology
of an individual
through a body language.
How the person is
carrying themselves,
what's happening
there energetically--
the vital force that's
obvious or not--
is all a byproduct of how
this energy is flowing
through the body or not
because of blockages, because
of interferences, or because
of circuits that have never
even gotten built before.
Because we've never tapped them.
Because we didn't give
ourself permission
to believe in ourselves
to come forward
with what we've known in our
deep hearts, in our core,
in our deep wisdom selves.
We've never been able to trust.
We don't have a trusted
relationship with the universe.
And so until that happens,
we have a tendency
to like shut off and block
it from the very beginning.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>>LISA: So you've
identified these
through these energy codes.
Can you tell us what those are?
And you have new
book out coming.
>>MORTER: Sure, yes, yes.
In the book, I'm
going to be described
I bring that over the
years I codified what
was happening with
patients as I started
working with energetics.
About 20 years ago,
I had an experience.
It was a tremendous awakening,
illuminating experience,
where I awakened in
entirely different dimension
than this physical body
world that we're living in.
And after that, I wanted
to return to that state
because it was pretty amazing.
There was a complete
knowing, a complete presence.
There was nothing missing.
It was blissful.
There was nowhere to go.
Nothing to become.
It was completely complete.
And I wanted some
more of that as soon
as I came down out
of that experience.
I could see 360
degrees around me
in a brilliant
light so bright, it
was 10 times brighter
than the brightest day
in the desert I had ever seen.
And I could see the
Earth beneath me
about the size of a marble.
And I was embedded into it up to
what would have been my knees.
And I was just this beautiful
crystalline ray of light.
It was an amazing experience
that changed my life forever.
Here I was a doctor in case
management, outcomes related,
scientific approach to things.
And now I had this experience
that was completely
blowing my circuits.
And I had to make
sense out of it.
I had to understand it because
this world didn't explain it.
The world of science didn't have
a walking, talking explanation
for what I had just experienced.
And so I devoted my
life to figuring out how
to merge those things together.
And I know that
that's the reason
that I came-- that's the
reason I'm on the planet.
So in that, I began turning my
life into a living laboratory.
And as I would work with
how to return to that state,
I began sharing
it with patients.
And they started
getting better faster
and staying better longer.
And so I started observing this.
And I began to just codify
what they were doing.
So "The Energy Codes"
are these codification
that our principles
and practices
that allow us to live from
our creatorship instead
of our survivorship--
meaning really
trusting who we are
and building a way
to make that easier,
accessible for everyone.
>>LISA: That's amazing.
So all that we talked
about in the beginning
of re-establishing that
energy and allowing
it to flow through
the body, you've
been able to decode where
people have the blockages
and to allow it to flow again.
>>MORTER: And what causes
building of new blockages too.
>>LISA: Once they're
clear, you can just--
It's great.
>>MORTER: It's not just about
clearing what we've already
mustered up and collected as
gunk in our lives, et cetera,
but also really
training our minds
to find the real us-- this
authentic essential self,
this deep soulful self that
is here underneath the scenes
and to steward it.
Einstein said we're
given this beautiful gift
of the intuitive and
this rational mind
to act as its loyal servant.
And we've created a culture
that honors the servant instead
of the gift.
And that's what
we've been doing.
And by doing so, we
live in our heads.
And we just have to learn to
live as the intuitive gift
because that is the truth.
>>LISA: I don't
think I understand
could have created
half that he did
without that level of
intuition and brilliance.
>>MORTER: Yes,
absolutely, I agree.
>>LISA: Let's take a look here
at Dr. Sue Morter in action.
>>MORTER: So what
we're going to do
is use this mechanism
to see what's
your storage account
looking like regarding
your beliefs relative
to these visions
that you wrote down for
yourselves over lunch
like you did, I'm sure.
So what I want you to
do is just take a moment
and think about one
of those visions.
You don't even have
to say it out loud.
But just think this is
something that you would
like to hold true for yourself.
So just think of whatever it
would be for you and think it.
And you hold right
here and think
that thought with
your eyes open first.
Eyes open, think the
thought, push back here--
and it has to be in a
present tense positive since.
It's not in the
future, it's now.
You're claiming it as
though it already exists.
So see it already existing.
It is this way or I am
this way-- whatever it is.
Hold right here-- that
was a good effort.
You're trying really hard.
I can feel it.
That's good, so don't
let me hurt you.
So that just means-- good news,
we can do something about it.
So what we're going
to do is we're
to give you a better chance
of manifesting that than you
had before you came up here.
So don't be disappointed
that it went weak.
You got it?
All right, so makes sense?
I want to see why
did her arm go weak.
I want to know
what's up with that.
She should be able to have
this vision for herself
and respond in strength.
Nothing should
short circuit her.
So something is creating
a short circuit.
And I don't know what it is--
so does she
So we're going to find that out.
Six words-- she's not going
to think about how it applies.
She's just going to think about
these words-- relax your risk,
keep your elbows straight.
I'm going to hold this opposite
shoulder and push down here.
You guys are going to be
doing this in a moment
so pay close attention.
So I just want to
know, what's the deal?
What's the interference
here on the line?
Is it fear?
Hold here-- is it anger?
Hold here-- is it love?
hold here-- is it sadness?
Hold here-- may be
some sadness here.
Is it enjoyment?
Hold her-- maybe.
Is it judgment?
Hold here-- so we had
three that made it go weak.
Now, between those three,
I need more specificity.
All right, so here's the
beautiful thing about the body.
It's constantly prioritizing.
So now we come in and say
between judgment and enjoyment
and sadness--
those were the three, right?
Sadness, enjoyment, judgment--
that made it go weak.
Yes, am I correct?
Just was making sure.
So think of those three--
I want to know which
one is in priority.
Is it sadness?
Is it enjoyment?
Is it judgment?
Well, we got it down to two?
You follow?
Between enjoyment and judgment--
give it to me straight.
What is it here?
Is it enjoyment?
Is it judgment?
Voila, there we are--
pretty fascinating.
>>LISA: Are you able to
tell us some of the codes
and how we can
discover those are
learned those within ourselves?
They're fairly simple, right?
>>MORTER: The initial ones,
the foundational ones--
I don't want people
to think that they're
going to understand all of
what I'm teaching from this.
But we can initiate some
understanding there absolutely.
And they can have an
experience because of that.
>>LISA: OK, great, so let's
talk about some of those codes.
What are they?
What are just your basic ones?
>>MORTER: So there are
some fundamental things
that an individual can do that
are going to pull them back
onto this essential core being.
And one of those
things that we can do--
picture it this
way, we land here.
And we kind of
splat, we disperse.
We kind of don't
know what's what.
Our mind goes one way,
our breath goes another,
our body goes another way.
And we're just out here hanging
out trying to make it work.
And because of that,
we identify as the mind
that's looking around,
looking outwardly
to try to figure
out how to fit in,
how to be safe, how to do
the right thing, et cetera.
And our circuits get built in
an externally-oriented fashion.
In order to reverse
this, we have
to direct our circuitry,
our attention,
back inward to call all these
parts of us back home again.
And as we do so,
we start to unify.
And when we unify, we have a
greater power in the world.
And we can feel ourselves here.
We have a sense of self that
we have never had before.
So think of it like that that
what we're about to practice
is pulling ourselves
back home again, landing
in the core of the body.
So that mind and body
and breath-- spirit--
spirit in the body is
the breath in the body.
So if we can get mind and body
and spirit working together
again, what happens is a
reorganization of the priority.
We're no longer now having
to live from our minds,
we can live from our
wholeness-- a unified version.
>>LISA: Otherwise, we're just
disenfranchised all the time
and that's those disconnected
pieces of ourselves
that we leave out there
to grow and develop.
And we don't own them again.
>>MORTER: Yes, and with the best
of our efforts, we try so hard
and we never accomplish
what we're after.
Because we're working from
a compromised disposition.
>>LISA: Not a wholeness.
>>MORTER: Yes, so
simple things--
it's kind of wild.
But if we can imagine that
the energy is out here,
and it's bigger
than bigger than me,
bigger than my physical body.
And I have to like bring it
in and bring some organization
to it, anchor it.
So that I can
concentrate in my core.
So that I can use that
concentrated energy
for purposes of
healing, purposes
of piercing through veils that
are keeping my personal power
from accessing my ability to
experience unconditional love
and keeping me from
experiencing wisdom
and connecting that
to my personal power
and being able to manifest in
all these different energies
that are housed at
different levels of our body
now get to start talking to each
other so that we can be strong
and we can be loving
at the same time.
We can be innovative and we can
be wise and maintain a finger
on the pulse of what has
traditionally been helpful
for humanity.
So that we're not throwing the
baby out with the bathwater as
we're trying to create a
new solution in the world.
So all of this can come
together if we just
do some of these simple things.
So one of them is like--
it's kind of wild--
but if you think about if you
were going to the bathroom,
and you had to stop the
stream all of a sudden.
You'd have to squeeze
certain muscles
in the base of the pelvic bowl.
If you squeeze those
muscles and you
kind of lift them up
toward your heart,
and it might seem kind of
weird to think about doing that
the first few times.
But if you practice
it a few times,
it becomes second nature.
And it gives the
subconscious an opportunity
to find a stabilizing presence
inside the core of the body.
And the reason that
that is important
is if we don't have a
stabilizing sense of self
inside the core of
our being, we start
creating friction in
our outer world trying
to figure out who we are.
If we can create this gentle
tension inside the body,
then we can have a sense of
where we are in the universe
and who we are and
have a sense of self.
And so this simple thing, it's
a root lock exercise-- just
locking the energy at
the root of our spine,
allows us to start to
develop this, oh, OK, there's
my reference point.
It's like having
something to hold onto.
>>LISA: So it's a
grounding piece.
>>MORTER: It's a
>>LISA: It's the
root of our spine.
>>MORTER: It's at the
tip of the tail bone.
>>LISA: And there's a lot of
nerve endings there as well.
>>MORTER: Tremendous
nerve endings
that ironically are
the exact nerves that
run through the
hips and the pelvis
and the legs and the
feet into the Earth.
And so there's a
line of communication
that's trying to happen
between the base of our spine
and the very Earth
that we walk on
and the Earth's
grounding frequencies
are so powerful for
stabilizing our inspirations
and our intuitions and
our dreams and desires.
So we need them both.
We need them both.
So this root lock is helpful--
just squeeze these muscles
at the base of the pelvis.
And then hug your
heart on the inside,
the center of your chest.
Not just your heart
muscle but in the core--
like if you were just
going to squeeze your body,
make it smaller at the chest
level, smaller front to back
and smaller side to side.
And then go inside from
there, like inner rings
on a tree to the very inside--
and just give it a hug.
Just give your heart a hug.
And now this root lock and then
this heart hug just above that.
Then constrict your
throat just a little bit--
just kind of like a
Darth Vader breath--
just kind of like
ujjayi breathing.
If you're a yogi, you
would understand that term.
And it might sound like
if you're almost snoring,
what we want is a sound that's
audible for just a moment.
So that the mind
can find where I'm
supposed to be tracking
my attention up
and down through this central
core channel of the body.
Then let's just roll our
eyes up for a moment,
just roll them up.
Can you feel a slight
tension behind your eyes?
Just use that tension point
as another anchoring point
as if we were going to
drop a plumb line straight
down through the central
core of the body,
from the top of the head
through the center of the brain
through that tension spot behind
your eyes and relax your eyes.
But memorize that place
in the center of the brain
and then breathe so that
you can hear your breath.
And then hug your
heart and then squeeze
at the root of the spine.
Just kind of try
it all on at once.
It's going to feel
awkward at first.
>>LISA: It feels contracting.
>>MORTER: All right, so then
take a breath from the Earth.
And imagine that you're
breathing up into your belly
and hug your heart right
in the middle of that.
And then exhale right up
through your throat and right up
through the center of the brain.
Exhale through your nose
and shoot the breath right
out the top of your
head just like a dolphin
would out of a blowhole.
Energetically, this is
a measurable reality
that there is a
channel of energy that
moves through the human system.
It'll drop the shoulders,
and it will relax you now.
Find that whole
plum line again--
these four anchor points--
just eyes, throat, heart,
root to the spine.
Fine that line, imagine it,
and take a breath from overhead
and breathe right
down into your belly.
And let it feel good
while it's coming through
and then exhale right
through your nose.
Exhale, just shoot it right
down through your body
and into the Earth.
Just inhale and exhaling
through the nose
picks up power moving the
breath through the turbulence
in the sinuses
propels that breath
to the bottom
lobes of the lungs,
which activates the
parasympathetic nervous system,
which is just the
part that relaxes.
So it sends a signal
into the nervous system,
just by how we're breathe--
>>LISA: Everything's OK
>>MORTER: --that all is well.
It's OK to chill out now.
We can use this
energy differently
than we've been using it before.
And exhaling into
the earth then again.
So this is called a
central channel breath.
It's a very foundational
way to begin
moving energy through the
body in an organized fashion.
And we teach lots
of details on top
of that to allow
someone to recognize
why I'm upset in a
particular situation, what
I need to do differently
so that I'm not
upset in this situation.
Because upsets, frustrations--
those kinds of issues
occur in our lives
because we don't
have the circuitry in
our system hooked up
to allow our wisdom and our
love and our personal power
and our ability to manifest
our sense of self all connected
to each other.
And so we have a
reactive response
to things that happen in life
that cause us to just explode.
>>LISA: Yes, especially, with
things like anger or tension
and stress locked
in the body, there's
no way for that to escape.
It just stays.
>>MORTER: Yes, what I
want people to realize
is that those energies
are good energies.
They're just not connected with
where they're supposed to go.
So they route into
explosive emotional states
because we don't know what to
do with the energy instead.
But that is so much
power in that energy
if we knew how to
route it and that's
what I want people to learn.
>>LISA: But also
people anesthetize it.
They drink it or they
drug it or they quiet it
in some way that turns--
because they can't handle it.
>>MORTER: Because they're
not utilizing it the way
that it's supposed
to be utilized.
>>LISA: Isn't that great?
>>MORTER: It's like stepping
behind the wheel of a car
or sitting down behind a car--
a race car.
And throwing it in drive and
throwing your foot on the gas
and letting go of
the steering wheel.
It's kind of scary.
And so instead of doing that,
it's like, get me out of here.
So we're looking for
all kinds of ways
to dampen or
anesthetize discomfort
of being in the Ferrari
that's headed down the road
with no one in charge.
That's what's happening.
>>LISA: This should be
taught in addiction clinics
and so forth how to reach
channel that energy.
>>MORTER: Yes, we are working
with that kind of application
of the work currently.
We're working to
get into helping
people to come off of
prescription medications
as well as the other drugs that
are not helping our culture
progress forwardly in
a functional manner.
>>LISA: Interesting,
and you also
integrate yoga into your world.
And we have some
beautiful pictures here
of you doing yoga on the
wall, and it's beautiful.
Where is that?
>>MORTER: Well, there
are many, many things.
We take sacred journeys
around the world
to sacred sites
because of the energies
that exist at sacred sites.
It's important to recognize
that the temples like
the pyramids and Machu Picchu
and the temples across India,
et cetera, all over the
world, Easter Island as well--
those temples are built
where they are built because
of the energetic of the planet.
And then the temples hold
that energy and reverberated
and magnify it even more.
And then the people that have
been going to the temples
and accentuating their
honoring of the divine nature
and those resources
that are available to us
have magnified it even more.
So when we go there
we are enhanced.
We're in an environment
where we can
start to stabilize because
the energy frequency is such
that it is.
And yoga is the creation of a
temple within our own system.
When we put the body in
certain sacred geometries,
certain positions, it creates
a pattern of energy flow
through the body
automatically enhancing
its natural multi-dimensionality
that the human system is
designed to be accessing.
Instead of just
living in our heads
and trying to make
life work, we start
to learn to capitalize
upon the benefits of yoga.
Yoga brings mind, body, breath
back together again as well.
We know that.
And many of the true
necessity for yoga
and the true message
behind yoga--
many times it is lost.
And we just think it's
about becoming flexible--
those are beautiful byproducts.
Becoming slimmer and
fit and more flexible
are beautiful byproduct
products of yoga.
But yoga was really
intended to traverse energy
through the body so that we
could wake up in our high brain
centers to our creativity rather
than being stuck in our lower
brain centers operating from
a place of fear and survival.
>>LISA: Yes, so really
yoga poses are essentially
sacred geometry.
>>MORTER: They are
putting the body
in sacred geometrical
shapes that
allow the energy to
activate certain meridians
and nadis, just the
ways that energy
flows through the
body in bioenergetics.
It allows the
enhancement of that flow.
So that we can move out of
a state of fear and survival
into a state of
well-being and creativity
and genius, our creative genius.
I teach an entire system of yoga
called Body Awake Yoga, where
we are using yoga
to help us awaken
to the true essential self, not
just getting through the poses
but recognizing that how
this has been a fitting me
and what it's doing for
my endocrine system,
my nervous system, my
lymphatic system, of course,
but even more, awakening me
to the true essential self,
the soulful self, the
truth of who I am.
But we are here, the
world is in our favor.
This is meant to be.
Whatever is happening
in our lives
is here in the support
of our recognizing
our own magnificence.
And when things happen
that don't feel like that,
it's really easy to just splat
again and jump up in our heads
and try to figure out why
this is happening to me
and try to name
why that's so wrong
and then try to strategize on
how to survive the wrongness
that I'm facing everyday.
And all of that is a
waste of our energy.
It is not our purpose
for being here.
Our purpose for being here is
to awaken to our creatorship
and to recognize that
we belong, fully wholly,
and that there is
nothing happening other
than the universe
trying to support us
in that exact project.
So when things go
differently than we thought,
if we weren't so
addicted to control,
we would be able to
recognize, oh, there's
a reason it's going the
way that it's going.
And what I'm teaching people--
and I can share another little
exercise at some point
if that works for--
>>LISA: Around
self-doubt or something,
when we do doubt that.
>>MORTER: Yes, exactly--
something goes differently
than we thought it was
going to and we get upset
or we get afraid.
And then our
reaction is OK I have
to control my
environment because I'm
freaked out right here.
I've got to control my
environment so that I'm safe,
so that I'm OK.
And that's why we're
addicted to control.
Because we're
living in our heads,
our heads aren't
connected to our bodies.
We're living in our
minds and our minds
aren't connected to the body.
And as the mind becomes
connected to the body,
it starts to slow down.
It starts to get real.
It starts to get clear, a more
rational way of processing
what's going on here.
And so when something happens
that isn't what we anticipated
or isn't what we
thought we wanted,
the invitation is this--
rather than jump
to the conclusion
that that is happening not in my
favor and that it's against me,
just assume that
this is in my favor.
And instead of asking
why is this happening
or why do you do that or
all of the stuff that we do,
just take your mind's
attention to the body.
And the body is
going to tell you why
this is happening in your life.
The body is going to tell the
mind why this is happening.
So I shouldn't say the
body is going to tell you.
Because we are not supposed
to be identified as our mind.
We're supposed to be the spirit
that has a body and has a mind
And so if I can train my
mind to come onto the body,
I'm going to use those
two tools so that I
can express as the intuitive
out into the world--
as the magnificent soulful
being that Einstein
was speaking about out into
the world without hesitation.
So if I can't do
that automatically,
there's a reason.
And it's because I don't have
the neurocircuitry in place
to be able to process
what's going on here.
It's blowing my circuits.
So instead of asking
why is this happening,
ask where is this happening?
And what you're going
to find is there's
going to be a charge in
your throat or in your chest
or in your gut.
Somewhere there's going to
be a charge of energy that's
hitting up against a blockage
or a gap that doesn't have
the circuits in place to let
that energy flow right back up
through us and arrive at our
conscious level unaltered.
It's not getting there.
And so we freak out.
We're not getting the
message that all is well
because it's getting blocked in
the gut or blocked in the chest
or blocked in the throat
before it ever arises up here
into where we can
perceive what's going on.
So if you get a
knot in your throat,
there's a good reason for it.
If you get a knot in your
chest, a knot in your gut,
there's a good reason for it.
It's in your favor.
But what we do as
a culture is we
exit if it creates
such discomfort.
And I'm saying stay the
course, come back home,
do not leave home.
Because if you'll come
here and see where
the knot is and squeeze it back.
So let's say you're
in the situation
where you're up
against something
that's upsetting you--
take your attention to the body.
I call it, "take
it to the body."
Very creative term--
take it to the body
and squeeze back
whatever you feel.
If you've got a knot in
your throat right then,
squeeze the throat and squeeze
these four anchor points
that we were just
working with earlier
and start breathing up and
down your central channel.
Until you can start to feel the
throat or the chest or the gut,
wherever this extra energy
is charged and blocked
until you can start to
feel it release and flow
into this central
channel breathing
that we've been doing.
And as we do that,
we build circuitry
for this energy to
no longer become
interfered with or blocked.
And the next thing
you know, you feel OK.
And you don't know why.
>>LISA: See now that's
great because in the past,
when I've gotten the
messages from the body of you
need to slow down,
I automatically
say, well, there's no way.
And I argue with myself.
And I can't do this
and this didn't--
and I just go right
back into the mental.
So you're saying feel where slow
down would locate in my body--
>>MORTER: Well, when
you say, there's no way.
I can't say slow down.
You get the message that says
slow down and then your head
says I can't--
>>LISA: Don't we all?
>>MORTER: Right, not
just you but this is--
you are humanity.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>>LISA: Maybe not you.
>>MORTER: You?
No, we-- this is what
we're all dealing with.
We're all dealing with this.
So in that moment where
we say, I can't stop.
I can't.
I can't if I do
that, then I drop all
this stuff, these projects--
>>LISA: I can't quit this job
even though I hate the job
because I have to pay for this.
I mean, we do it all the time.
>>MORTER: In that
moment when you
think that thought, take
your attention to the body
and see where is there
a charge in my body
when I think the thought,
I can't slow down.
I got the wisdom
message to slow down
and my head says
I can't slow down.
When I think the thought,
I can't slow down,
there's going to be a charge
somewhere in my body--
>>LISA: Not just in the head?
>>MORTER: Because it's
a limiting belief.
>>LISA: So it's not
in the head, it's
really going to be in the body?
>>MORTER: It's going to show
you something in your body
that if you built the circuits
at that place in your body,
you would no longer believe
you can't slow down.
>>LISA: Fascinating--
so you could find it
in your gallbladder or
something and then it's--
>>MORTER: And you even have
to know the name of it.
Well, what's this
organ or what's that?
Just squeeze it.
You have to talk body talk.
If you squeeze it,
now the body knows
that the mind has found the
message that the body has
been trying to tell the mind.
Here's how it works.
The soul speaks to the body.
And the body speaks to the mind.
And the mind doesn't listen.
So we're disconnected.
So now we're saying, OK, mind--
listen.
Listen to the body because
it's speaking a language to you
that the real me
is trying to say.
I'm in here, and I'm giving
these messages to the body.
And the mind has to learn how
to perceive me, has to find me--
the real me, the
essential soulful self.
>>LISA: So when we're
dealing with a big subject
of, say, breast cancer.
And one in eight women get
breast cancer-- in some way,
cancerous cells activate.
How do you connect
this information
you're talking about to that?
>>MORTER: You don't
even have to know.
You just say when
you think about--
someone's already been
diagnosed, let's say.
When they think
about the diagnosis--
like here it is.
It's devastating.
It's terrifying me.
It's doing all the
things that it's doing.
Whatever it is-- all
of those things--
when I think those thoughts
and have these feelings,
where in my body am I activated?
And it might not take
you to the breast.
It might take you to the gut.
It might take you
to the stomach.
to your throat,
to your chest, something.
It originated somewhere along
the central core of your body.
And if we squeeze that back and
start breathing a nurturing,
loving, come home
to yourself, kind
of intimate, precious,
sacred breath--
>>LISA: Communication.
>>MORTER: Connect the mind onto
the body in a loving presence
kind of way.
What begins to happen
is we start to build
the circuitry for self-healing.
And when self-healing
is present, cancers,
degenerative
diseases, arthritis's,
all of these chronic
conditions begin
to turn around because
they exist because
of a cellular
implosion or eruption
due to energetic blockages
that are overstimulating cells
or understimulating cells
in such a dramatic way
that breakdown is occurring.
>>LISA: And you see this in
your clinic all the time,
people coming with this.
And they actually reverse it?
>>MORTER: They
actually reverse it.
Now, there are only
three legal ways
to treat cancer in our country.
And it is radiation,
medication, and surgery.
And so we're treating
the whole person.
And when we treat the
whole person, which
is what we were talking about
earlier in this conversation,
healing starts to happen.
When the whole person unifies
and awakens and energies
start moving again that have
been shut down, blocked,
or shut out or
never even activated
because of the environment
that we were raised in,
we never even gave ourselves
permission-- things
begin to change.
>>LISA: You explain it
in such a beautiful way
that I completely can
see how that would work.
If you take this concept
onto a global level,
think about the
cancers in our world
and how the disease is
happening and the planet
and the destruction and
the pollution and humanity
in some cases--
you can really start to
communicate and establish
a healthy connection back with
those pieces of our planet
that are ailing.
And you can do this through
meditation, can't you?
>>MORTER: It is
so amazing, we're
talking about the
power of the mind.
And, I mean, it just
brings tears to my eyes.
Just think about this.
The power of the mind,
when it kicks into neutral
and becomes the observing
mind and the stewarding mind
to this beautiful,
soulful self, we
tap into an entirely
different bandwidth
of human consciousness.
And that bandwidth of
human consciousness
encircles the planet.
And when we tap into
the bandwidth of unity
and possibility
and loving devotion
and come home for
ourselves, what happens
is we emit that
vibrational frequency
into the entire bandwidth
of human consciousness.
And so someone on the
other side of the planet
has a loving experience, and
they don't even know why.
Because you're changing
the radio station
that everyone is dialed into.
And the higher the frequency,
which happens the more we
embody, we raise the
vibration of frequency.
When we become
what it is that we
want to have happen
in the world,
it emits in such a foundational
radio station that everyone
is impacted by it.
And we have to be in the body
to actually accomplish that.
We can't do it with
the mind alone.
>>LISA: I can see why
you do what you do.
Because every person that you
connect with their body again,
you're essentially
connecting the Earth again.
>>MORTER: It changes the planet.
>>LISA: It goes back
to your NDE where
you were able to see the entire
planet and your polar affect
of that planet.
>>MORTER: Yes, I saw that
there's only one thing
happening here.
And it is light
coming into form.
And it is goodness.
And we have to
reframe our perception
until it looks that way to us.
And the ways to do it are
these codified fashions
that I've found to work right
here in this little laboratory
that each one of us
has in such a fashion
that it is sustainable.
And it is the real thing.
And it goes on
exponentially forever.
Even when we're not
thinking of it anymore,
when we're connecting these
dots in these circuits
and we're living
as this, our minds
are now free to go on creating
things rather than having
to constantly think
about how we wish
it was different in the world.
We become a peaceful
presence that
brings a unifying quality,
not just to the person
standing next to us
but exponentially
into the entire bandwidth
of human consciousness.
>>LISA: Is that what
the quantum flip is?
>>MORTER: That is what
the quantum flip is.
>>LISA: Is it?
>>MORTER: The quantum flip
is an entire paradigm shift.
It's an entire reality
shift, recognizing
that we are quantum beings.
We are not linear beings.
We're not here to
learn to use the mind
in only a linear fashion,
which we have done so far.
And we're good at it.
We have to add some
additional elements.
And the new science
is bringing forward
this reality that says what
you think about comes about,
what you perceive is the
reality that you are living in.
And we have to learn to perceive
from this place of all as well.
We are truly capable of
more than we can believe.
All of our beliefs
are limiting beliefs--
all of them are.
We have to learn
to train ourselves
to become present rather than
be the believing machine that we
think we are.
We just have to train
ourselves to become present.
And when we're present,
we're available to make
a difference in the world.
>>LISA: Can we unbelieve things?
>>MORTER: Sure, you can kick
into this place of presence
that we're talking about.
And the beliefs that have
been driving our lives,
they start to fade and
disassemble themselves
if we're no longer feeding them.
When we tap a higher frequency
and are running that frequency
through this toric field
flow that I was describing
that drops down through
the body into the Earth
and rises up out the head
and around and around again--
when that energy becomes
more robust and of a higher
frequency, the mental
body the, mind field
starts to soften
in its presence.
And it just becomes
available, instead
of continuing to think it has
to drive and affirm and validate
those beliefs.
So then the beliefs are
no longer being fed.
And they start to dissolve
in fashions as they are
stored in subconscious memory.
>>LISA: Is this what you do?
I mean, I'm sure you get
stuck every now and then.
You have an incredibly
busy travel schedule.
And you do events and
workshops and everything.
You work with people.
Don't you get stuck?
>>MORTER: When I get
stuck, what's happening
is I'm bumping up against
the reasons that I came.
I'm bumping up
against the reasons
that I came here to evolve.
And so I get that if I'm
stuck in this moment,
I have to take it to the body
and see where the circuitry is
compromised if I ever want to
get through this stuckness.
So what used to take me
years to wrap my mind around,
what was going on I can
truly shift in an instant.
If in that moment
where I historically
would have reacted or gotten
into my protective personality
and duked it out,
I drop in, find
where the circuits are not.
Because there's a
charge in my body.
And I squeeze it back.
And I breathe up and down with
this gracious loving presence
as soon as I can.
Sometimes in the moment-- it's
hard to find loving presence.
>>LISA: Right, if you're
angry or if you're--
>>MORTER: Good news is
it's not time dependent.
When you get in bed that night,
pick up where you left off,
pick up where you
splatted and do the work
and build the circuit.
So that the next time, it
doesn't have a hold of you.
>>LISA: But what if
you see injustices
in the world of other
people doing horrible things
to other people or to you?
>>MORTER: So you
know what I know
is that we can take action.
But we have to take action
from a place of wholeness.
We can't take action from
a place of reactivity.
Mother Teresa would
always march for peace,
but she would never
marched against war.
It's kind of like this.
So if there is anger and
frustration about what we're
seeing in the world, take it to
the body, build the circuits,
come home to yourself, and step
into whatever conversations
or whatever actions
we want to take
from a place of integration,
of an interwovenness of mind,
body, spirit.
So that the vibration of
what comes out of your mouth
has a grounded and elevated
simultaneously frequency to it.
So that it has an
opportunity to disassemble
the distortions
that are happening
in these parts of the world.
And also take a look--
take a look-- when we are
upset about something that's
happening in the
world, take a look
and see am I doing that to
me somewhere inside of here?
Is this happening inside of
my little laboratory too?
Because if it is and
then I sit with that,
and I build some circuits--
meaning squeeze it and breathe
through when I think about
how I feel about the fact
that I'm doing
that to myself too.
Then I start to
build the circuitry
to not do it to myself anymore.
And when I don't, I impact
that entire bandwidth
that's encircling the globe.
So I have an opportunity to make
a change on something that's
happening continents away.
If I see that it's a
holographic universe
and what's happening over
there is happening in here,
because there's actually no
such difference as over there
and in here.
>>LISA: That's fascinating
I've been obsessed
with the suicides lately
and really passionately
hurting for these people,
where I want to help them.
No one in my life has ever
committed suicide that I know,
but I really am
concerned about this.
And I started saying
that to myself.
I said, well, what is
it inside of me that
wants to end something,
that wants to end something
not going right or
wants to end something?
And really started to
look at that inside myself
and I started to reveal things.
Oh, wow, this really
isn't working.
I didn't really need don't
to do it this way anymore.
Wait a minute, I need to
rethink this whole thing.
And I started to
do that, I started
to look at things that
really that I was just
doing on remote control
that were no longer working
or what I needed in me and have
a death about to no longer do.
>>MORTER: And that's a
beautiful way to look at it.
And what I would
encourage someone
who can't find the
wisdom, perspective
like you were able to
in that is to simply
say, how do I feel
when I give up,
when I just walk away,
when I disconnect or become
apathetic or think,
there's no way.
This is never going to change.
There's no hope.
There's no way.
When I have that thought, where
in my body am I activated.
And if it takes me to
my throat when there's
hopelessness, if it
takes me to my chest,
if it takes me to my gut--
squeeze it back.
And let it know I'm not
leaving you this time.
I'm not abandoning
you this time.
Let the mind no longer
abandon the soul
and give up and walk away.
Let the mind come back home
and stay home, squeeze it,
and start to breathe up and down
through this central channel--
this home base--
and allow the soulful self to
have a strong hold on the mind.
So that the mind
doesn't just quit.
Because when the mind quits--
initially, it can
happen through apathy
and that's painful to us.
>>LISA: But this is such
a great answer for--
not that there's one
answer to suicide--
but that return to home,
that connection with home.
>>MORTER: Yes, I've
worked with people
that were raised in cults.
I myself in years
past was involved
in something that was
very similar to that
and was not a healthy
place in a time when
I was reaching and searching.
Because I grew up with these
amazing principles, and there
was a missing element for me.
And just prior to putting
these pieces together,
I was searching in a big
way, in a dramatic way.
And in that, stumbled
into an environment
that wasn't healthy.
There was a lot of
manipulation and lying
and just all kinds of things
that people get engaged in.
And I recognized that
what's not happening here
is that I'm not
coming home for me.
And I had to learn
how to do that.
It was a great impetus
for the foundation
of this work and putting all
the pieces back together--
>>LISA: Isn't it
incredible how we
create that level of contrast?
And I ask all of my
guests that biggest
why that you do what you do.
And I'm going to
try not to cry here.
Because it's so beautiful.
I can so see your why.
Can you share it with us?
>>MORTER: It is because it's
the only thing that matters.
Doing mind, body,
breath reunion--
it's the reunion of
the human spirit.
And as we are able to be here
as the spirit beings that we are
and be here fully, then
this life experiences
is everything that
it is meant to be.
I will never not
be doing this work.
That's the way really.
We have to find
our own expression
of what we're here to do.
And I was raised
in an environment
that had so many answers.
There was so much
amazing information
that was talked about
at our dinner table.
We were talking
about quantum science
before it was ever even
talked about out in the world
and printed in the journals.
And yet there were
aspects of that truth
that that didn't completely
explain everything
that happened in my life
when I started meditating
and had these larger
than life experiences.
And so I had to come
to terms with the fact
that sometimes we have to go
beyond what we've been trained
and what our cultural
norm would say
and what our own family
dynamic believes in
and follow our path in order
to do what we're here to do.
And that is true for everyone.
>>LISA: Yes, yes, for anyone
who is in that situation--
I can see you around
the dinner table.
I'm a bioenergetics-- feeling
all, intuiting all, going wait,
doesn't make quite-- that's not
the full picture I want to tell
you, but I can't.
>>MORTER: And then
later in life, we
go through enough
experiences that we start
to put the pieces together.
And then when we give
ourselves permission
to reveal what we putting
together for ourselves
and have a trusted
relationship with the universe
then what gets to happen
is we bring our gifts.
>>LISA: Yes, and it
all unfolds perfectly.
When we look at it in
hindsight, it's all exactly
the way it should be.
>>MORTER: It was
all in divine order.
>>LISA: Yes, it was.
Thank you so much
for showing us what
the meaning of coming back
home into our body really is
and how to practically
connect back to home.
Thank you.
And thank you for
watching this show.
Your energy makes these
shows happen, so thanks
for being here as well.
And if you want to watch more
inspirational programming,
you can go to
"Inspirations" on Gaia.
I'm Lisa Garr, and
until next time,
I invite you to stay aware.